# The Common Fund Data Ecosystem's Crosscut Metadata Model (CFDE C2M2)

This document introduces the Crosscut Metadata Model
([C2M2](../CFDE-glossary.md#crosscut-metadata-model-c2m2)), a
flexible standard for describing biomedical experimental
data. The Common Fund Data Ecosystem group is creating a new
computing infrastructure, with C2M2 as its organizing principle,
to offer the health research community an unprecedented
array of intersectional data tools. The C2M2 system will
connect researchers with scale-powered statistical analysis
methods; deep, seamless searching across experimental data generated by
multiple projects and organizations; and new ways to aggregate
and integrate experimental data from different sources to
facilitate scientific replication and to drive new discoveries.

Using this new infrastructure, Common Fund data coordinating centers
([DCCs](../CFDE-glossary.md#data-coordinating-center-dcc)) will
share structured, detailed information ([metadata](../CFDE-glossary.md#metadata))
about their experimental resources with the research
community at large, widening and deepening access to usable
observational data. One immediate
consequence will be a drastic simplification in the
effort required to perform meta-analysis of results from
multiple independent teams studying the bioinformatics of
similar health-related phenomena.

## DCC Metadata Submissions

DCCs will collect and provide metadata to CFDE describing
experimental resources within their purview. Each metadata
submission will take the form of a set of tab-separated
value files
([TSVs](../CFDE-glossary.md#tab-separated-value-file-tsv)): precise formatting requirements for these
TSV filesets ([C2M2 instances](../CFDE-glossary.md#c2m2-instance)) are specified by
[JSON Schema documents](../C2M2-JSON-Schemas/),
each of which is an instance of the
[Data Package](http://frictionlessdata.io/docs/data-package/)
meta-specification published by the
[Frictionless Data](http://frictionlessdata.io/)
group. This meta-specification is a formal way to
define formatting requirements for sets of files
configured as relational database tables: [foreign-key](../CFDE-glossary.md#foreign-key)
relationships between tables, type checking of table fields
and other similar basic validation processes for database
management are supported. The C2M2 software infrastructure uses these schema
files to automatically validate format compliance and metadata integrity,
for each DCC's C2M2 metadata submission, during the
[C2M2 ingestion process](../CFDE-glossary.md#C2M2-ingestion-process).

CFDE offers DCCs three alternative metadata submission
formats (C2M2 Levels [0](./001-C2M2-LEVEL-0.md), [1](./002-C2M2-LEVEL-1.md) and
[2](./003-C2M2-LEVEL-2.md)), each of which is automatically
interoperable with the entire C2M2 software ecosystem. These
alternative formats are arranged in levels tiered according
to increasing complexity, reflecting anticipated differences in
the relative richness of metadata available to different DCCs at
any particular time. The general expectation is that each DCC will,
over time and as feasible, upgrade their submitted C2M2 metadata
by encoding it with increasingly rich C2M2 modeling levels -- enabling
increasingly powerful downstream search and integration tools -- as
the life cycle of DCC/CFDE technical interaction matures.

## C2M2 Richness Levels

In its fullest form ([Level 2](./003-C2M2-LEVEL-2.md)),
C2M2 is an [entity-relationship system](../CFDE-glossary.md#entity-relationship-er-model)
that describes fundamental biomedical research resources
like digital [files](../CFDE-glossary.md#file),
experimental [events](../CFDE-glossary.md#event),
[project](../CFDE-glossary.md#project) hierarchies,
material [biosamples](../CFDE-glossary.md#biosample)
and the [subject organisms or environments](../CFDE-glossary.md#subject)
from which they derive. Essential relationships between these
fundamental resources are also formally described, documenting
(for example) which samples were processed to produce a
particular data file; which subject a given sample was
drawn from (possibly obfuscated to protect patient privacy); or when
a particular blood pressure measurement was made.

Modeling and data wrangling are always difficult, even for
experts. Requiring every DCC to represent their metadata using
all possible features of the [full Level 2 C2M2
model](./003-C2M2-LEVEL-2.md)
as a precondition for submitting metadata to CFDE would
be infeasible for several important reasons (apart from
creating avoidable and unnecessary onboarding delays).
Perhaps the most operationally relevant of these is that
the C2M2 model must remain as flexible as possible, especially
during its developmental phases, in order to accomodate mutual learning
between DCCs and CFDE as the process of data ingestion
develops. It is far more expensive and error-prone to
repeatedly change a complex model than it is to build
one gradually from a simpler core concept which is allowed
to stabilize before more specialized branches are allowed
to solidify.

With the design of C2M2, we are splitting the difference
between the ease of evolution inherent in a simple model and
the operational power provided to downstream applications by more
complicated and difficult-to-maintain frameworks.
DCCs with advanced, operationalized metadata modeling
systems of their own should not encounter arbitrary
barriers to CFDE support for more extensive relational
modeling of their metadata if they want it; CFDE will
maintain such support by iteratively refining
[C2M2 Level 2](./003-C2M2-LEVEL-2.md)
according to needs identified while working with
more operationally advanced DCCs. Newer or smaller DCCs, by contrast, may
not currently have enough readily-available information
to feasibly describe their experimental resources using this
most complex C2M2 modeling level: CFDE will support
cases like these by offering simpler but still well-structured
metadata models, lowering barriers to rapid entry into
the data ecosystem.

Simpler C2M2 metadata instances must be maintained by
CFDE in such a way as to maximize interoperability with
more complex C2M2 variants, and the whole system should be
structured to minimize side effects caused by model
changes. These considerations have led to the
specification of C2M2 [richness levels](../CFDE-glossary.md#c2m2-richness-levels):
concentric, canonical variants of C2M2 which are benchmarked at
increasing levels of complexity and detail, wherein each successive
level is a value-added superset of all of the metadata
encompassed by the previous (less complex) level.

Accordingly, two less complex C2M2 variants are on offer
in addition to the full ([Level 2](./003-C2M2-LEVEL-2.md)) C2M2 model.
[Level 0](./001-C2M2-LEVEL-0.md) describes truly basic metadata defining
a collection of digital files. [Level 1](./002-C2M2-LEVEL-1.md) introduces models
for core experimental resources like [biosamples](../CFDE-glossary.md#biosample)
and [subjects](../CFDE-glossary.md#subject), and the core
relationships between them; a rudimentary set of search targets
in the form of annotations like the anatomical location of
the source for a human tissue sample or taxonomic data describing
biosample source organisms and study subjects; and basic support for arranging
experimental resources into named groups, based either on a
hierarchy of [projects](../CFDE-glossary.md#project)
or on more arbitrarily structured
[collections](../CFDE-glossary.md#collection), which can
be defined using any relevant scientific or operational categorization.
